bias is a bit like gravity in that it's
everywhere it's powerful it's pervasive
it's sheeps our daily actions what we do
and we don't do what we can do and can't
do but bias is also like gravity in that
it's actually pretty easy to cope with
if you're just aware of it if you're
aware of your own bias if you admit it
to yourself and if you have some kind of
detached and self disciplined attitude
you can work around it you can have a
good-humoured attitude towards it you
can be willing to laugh at your own
shortcomings your own faults at your own
biases um I got an email this morning
from a professor of Sanskrit hi Eliza
someone who's read my work on and off
over the years and has correspond with
me at different times inviting me to
talk about the problems that arise
basically because of the fissure between
Sanskrit scholars and Pali scholars so
Sanskrit is a language that's mostly
associated with Hinduism it also has a
special role for Tibetan Buddhism
Mongolian Buddhism Mahayana Buddhism in
general whereas Pali as a language is
almost exclusively studied because of
its significance for Terra battle
Buddhism and for the most ancient most
intact Canon of texts about Buddhist
philosophy etc that we've got so Pali is
also very important for places like Sri
Lanka Thailand Cambodia Myanmar Laos
etcetera but as you can imagine that is
not an equal pairing Sanskrit gets more
than 90 percent of the attention this
fame and the money and pali is getting
an incredibly small amount and I mean
one of the advantages of doing this by
YouTube instead of in the written word
I'm not bitter about that I'm not
resentful about that I'm really not and
I also do not regard it as Western
academia is fault or Western acting his
problem if anyone would be spending the
money to support scholarship of a
language like
Holley it should be a country like
Thailand or like Sri Lanka what have you
I don't think that a country like Canada
has any mandate to spend a big budget
and supporting scholarship of this
language nor does support the
scholarship on Buddhism of any kind in
general why would we it's not our
problem
um meanwhile countries all around the
world right now seem to be very easy
eager to make the civil war in Syria
into their own problem and to take
responsibility for that well you know
you you pick your friends and you pick
you out of millions and then the last
time Canada got involved in peacekeeping
didn't work out very well remember a few
decades ago we got involved in that
civil war on the island of Cyprus did
that how did that turn it oh but I
digress
you know these questions okay
sanskrit and pali i was invited this
morning to comment on the ways of which
the predominance of Sanskrit scholars in
this whole field distorts or reduces the
quality of studies about Pali and tera
vaada Buddhism what have and you know I
do not see that problem in terms of a
technical problem with language if you
can read French then learning to read
Spanish is a technical problem if you
can read 18th century Italian reading
16th century Italian is a technical
problem and when you go back to that
period you know even reading Italian
from one province of Italy versus other
problems if it is going to be a problem
etc etc there are technical problems in
the study of languages ancient and
modern but that's not the cell problem
so the problem I want to talk about um
fundamentally the problems are of bias
and some of those biases are positively
expressed biases but the the
the bigger a part of a bias is in the
questions that never get asked the
problems that never get raised the
things that never get problematized and
pass unnoticed and scholarship crucially
depends on Socratic method and scrutiny
in the simplest sense of being able to
ask and answer questions of how do you
know that how did you come to that
conclusion why do you assume that how
did you construct that thesis where are
the pieces you put together to make that
puzzle whatever it is and questions of
that kind that are so crucial to the
progress of human knowledge and inquiry
are actually profoundly unwelcome in
western academia and are often regarded
as threading so this comes back to
Sanskrit in the following peculiar way
if there's one lesson we learn from the
history of the United States of America
it's that separate-but-equal doesn't
work you get people whose discipline and
responsibility is to Sanskrit and then
they're put in charge of something to do
with Palli as the kind of footnote and
they don't develop a robust familiarity
with Pali as a Canon they don't become
conversant with the political issues
within the Terra battleworld they don't
become familiar with the types of
vendetta's
even the types of racism that exists
within scholarship tera vaada Buddhism
and the politics that divide people so
while they feel self-confident
sophisticated because they they may be
very sophisticated about Sanskrit and
about all the politics that exist within
say the Hindu study of Sanskrit or the
Tibetan study of Sanskrit in relation to
Tibet or some other Sanskrit field
they're actually zoomed in reference to
Pali which is also filled they're asked
to exercise scrutiny over their expect
to have expertise in and again the
problem is rarely a technical problem to
do with language or grammar or
dictionaries of vocabulary those
problems exist too but with that caveat
me stated I spoke to Professor of Santa
face to face within the last year and
and several points in that conversation
I did the thing that basic scrutiny
entails he would make a statement as
soon as he made this very high praise of
the old-fashioned scholar Rees Davis TW
rece Davis so this is fully 100 years
ago this scholarship and I said oh well
I'm surprised to hear you say that he
may be very flattering statements but a
wonderful scholarship which David is so
well you know what is your opinion based
on what have you actually read and you
know again he's a Sanskrit scholar he
hasn't read much he's never looked at
the problems of the actual patli
translation and interpretation and he
also hasn't read anything in terms of
the politics the critique and so on and
he also hasn't you know compared one
source to another and so on now
again I didn't do this in a hostile way
but after he explains a little bit I
told him a few jarring and disturbing
facts about Rees David's and the type of
bias he brought to the study of Buddhism
now among other things about Reis demons
he was anti-semitic and he constructed
and put forward a theory that is known
as Orion race theory that was part of
the history and development of you know
what became the Nazi Party in Germany
but before that was actually a political
justification for British imperialism in
India that's a very strange interesting
story it's covered briefly in an essay
or what I can provide a link or not
nobody wants to read this is YouTube
come on reading how 1986 um you know I
told some of these general facts about
Rees David's his career or his political
direction and so on these were not
technical problems with translation they
were being being profound issues that
you'd encounter in you know the
scholarly legacy of rece Davis and this
is not to say that I regard Rhys David's
work as worthless it's deeply flawed
but it's also interesting I mean it's
also worth studying in all kinds of ways
but if I were teaching a course to under
graduates on it I would start by laying
out look this is who this guy was
these were his biases this was his
agenda this is what his work
accomplished and let's also look at some
of the potholes in the road
um this is Professor exciting he was
completely unaware of this he had in
effect no skepticism towards a poly
source an appalling scholar and he sort
of said some further planning on saying
oh well that's very interesting but you
know restatements was still a
tremendously important segoe on the
field and i said to him yes but if you
knew what i just told you in this
conversation then you would not have
said any of the things you said just ten
minutes ago but you would have been
embarrassed to say that because now
already I've given you enough
information that you realize skepticism
and procedural rigor are required for
you to develop some kind of
sophisticated a reasonable evaluation or
analysis of who this scholar is and what
he has to say about Buddhism his
contribution to Buddhist studies put his
philosophy whatever you gonna say this
came up again and again at the same
conversation you know this professor
referred to the work of Rupert Gethin
tremendously positively and work of
bhikkhu bodhi tremendous Boozman and
both gives oh you know I've actually
written some critiques I've written some
articles that criticize pick up OD but
like let's stick with rubric effin if
you say to me that Rupert Gethin is a
great translator of poly and you are a
scholar of Sanskrit I would say you oh
well have you sat down and compared the
Pauline to the English and the answer is
no oh well have you compared the English
to the earlier English
that it is based on and that it's trying
to replace or perhaps challenged or
perhaps that it's derivative of perhaps
perhaps that's the sort of thing you
learn through reading or through
scholarship I would like to imagine that
within their own field of expertise
Sanskrit scholars do have this type of
disciplined analytical interrogation of
texts and sources and do have skepticism
about materials written in English until
they have looked at exactly these types
of factors
what's the earlier English translation
maybe there's a German translation or an
Italian translation not all of the
precedents are in English and you know
what is the asymmetry between the
primary source and the secondary source
what's the agenda of the author and what
have you and what's amazing to me is
that Sanskrit ists seem to just not ask
any of these questions in relation to
Pali in relation to fetes sources now
look maybe like Hindu Sanskrit Studies
is full of this same kind of guileless
unsophisticated uncritical reading of an
agile ation of received authorities I
doubt it I think these are smart people
who within their own field ask tough
questions and have debates and do use
Socratic method but when they look at
pally which really should be a separate
field and is instead subsumed into
Sanskrit it said treated as a footnote
within Sanskrit they just throw that
aside because they don't want to deal
with it to give a really quick
comparison around life so I know a lot
about or used to know a lot about the
politics in Laos and Thailand and
Cambodia and some other places um it
would be ridiculous if I then turned my
attention to Japan and just had a
completely uncritical attitude like oh
well oh well look political corruption
isn't the problem in Japan oh no I know
corruption in Laos and Thailand and I
know about violence in civil war but
Japan doesn't have any of these problems
some people do that
I mean we have this idiom in English the
grass is greener on the other side of
the hill in general people who work on
Sanskrit if they work on Hindu Sanskrit
they may really regard Sanskrit as the
language of the gods and then they
regard Pali as the sort of unfortunate
digression in the history of India that
they don't really want to deal with so
that's an attitude of contempt towards
pally and I can understand it if it's
positively stated as a bias if we're
aware of it would work around it maybe
we can still do research together maybe
we can still make progress as scholars
but the problem is that contempt tends
to be matched with this kind of just
this lack of scrutiny of just regarding
uncritically I mean I've had people say
to me so many times much oh but all the
scholarship on Pelle has already been
done all the patients are been done I
don't think these Sanskrit scholars
would ever say that about the
Mahabharata that's a Sanskrit epic poem
drama whatever you want to say even
though textually I mean the Mahabharata
is much simpler than looking at dense
Buddhist philosophy in the Pali cannon
or a lot of this stuff in pali has real
questions of translation interpretation
understanding I mean these seem Sanskrit
scholars so they may be a Mahayana
Buddhist they may be primarily engaged
in Hinduism you know this attitude
doesn't hinge on linguistic
technicalities several times I have
talked to again these these types of
scholars and you raise a simple issue
like slavery and they have no idea they
have no skepticism and no no sense of
scrutiny of what they've been told in
the past that actually the material
about slavery in the Pala Canon is
nuanced is complicated the Pali Canon is
not like Karl Marx's Communist Manifesto
it contains some kind of ironical and
interesting statements about human
rotation and slavery and we can talk
about that and teach you all course on
it and so on it's interesting but like
you know someone who's a Sanskrit
scholar and is already familiar with the
type of political propaganda that exists
within Hinduism and trying to
misrepresent or selectively quote from
Sanskrit text to serve some modern
nationalist interest in India those same
people will look with no scrutiny
whatsoever at a cynical Buddhist ploy to
try to misrepresent the Pali Canon as if
it were a radical socialist diatribe
calling for great human equality and to
tear down the system of oppression of
the poor by the wrench or something and
again that attitude and the part of
Sanskrit says to me in other ways be
sophisticated people it's not based on
looking at the English next to the pally
and it's not even based on looking at
one English source next to another
English source so yeah that is not the
answer this professor of Sanskrit wasn't
expecting at all but what I see as the
the main ghost haunting the field is
precisely that people who are experts in
Sanskrit are in positions of authority
of executive power over pally and
terawatt of studies and that they are
guileless they do not have any their
their dial us both in dealing with the
lies that Buddhists tell them and in
dealing with the the rifts that exist
within Buddhist scholarship because I
mean Buddhist scholars heat other
Buddhist scholars and so on Buddhist
scholars have their own agendas
some of them religious some of them not
so much I think that's enough to cover
in this one video I have a lot more say
but
for the moment at least it'll remain
unsaid